as we've mentioned students have been
online only this semester
but several did come in to take the
a.c.t and the psat
over the last few weeks and we were able
to successfully offer
socially distanced activities for those
that came in the night before
some of those options included lectures
that our faculty volunteered to teach in
our recital hall
the fact that so many of our faculty and
students chose to be part of these shows
demonstrates how important and how much
everyone loves being in the classroom
environment here and how much we miss
those interactions between the faculty
and the students that you just don't get
from a virtual experience so first we're
going to introduce dr jason anderson
who's offering a mini lesson on the
emperor
of all maladies taken from a lecture
given
to his modern genetic students each year
so thank you to mr sumler
back there for inviting me to do this
because
i guess i feel like i'm back in the
classroom
and this is as close as i'm gonna get
right now so
hopefully hopefully not going
we'll be back in the spring so what i
want to introduce to you all some of you
who have a science background some of
you um do
not but there's a topic that will
touch us all unfortunately
in our lives i got introduced
to this topic i want to say in 2010
and you know it's a phone call you're
another kid
you know uh your grandfather
has acute leukemia
huh i just talked to him earlier today
yeah his 30 days ago
what why okay
and then the next question of course i
was in graduate school then
and then my family asked well what is it
like a home specifically that i can kind
of
get you down the line and that's how i
kind of got introduced to cancer
and from there i became you know kind of
the informal doctor
of the family let my family know about
this so what i want to do for you today
is kind of give you not to scare you
but to let you know that this exists
and that it's really that it's root
it's simple cancer is a simple
a simply i guess simply explainable
disease but it's so complex i know
that's such a dichotomous
way of explaining it but it really is so
i want to kind of give you
i'm going to give you a scenario to kind
of paint where i want to go with this
so imagine that you're a
16 year old teenager
and of course what do y'all have in
front of you
y'all have yeah
23 and y'all have all this information
to know thyself learn
all about who you are right they give
you
all these different things right now to
even find out your
blood type by the way i'll be positive i
so all this information right from their
ancestry
that's great fine and then
until if you're a 16 year old teenager
and you do 23 and i
all mean of information and
maybe some information you don't want to
know
but they give it to you anyway so
imagine
you do this test and you find out hey
am a carrier or even worse
i have two mutated bronco one genes
you're 16 years old and all you wanted
to find out was
your ancestor but you find out you have
two
mutated broccoli what is this
whatever all of a sudden you have what's
known as the burden of knowing that's
what you're about to carry
with you for the rest of your life so i
want to play
to you uh play a short little video kind
of explaining this and then we'll
kind of move on from there
so kind of put yourself in in those
shoes
i'm 20 i'm young or i'm 15
i'm 16 and i get all this genetic
information
what do you do with it so
this is this happens with all inherited
diseases there's a chance that you may
find out something that you may want to
know
you may not want to know and
today we're going to talk about and this
is the title of a book and a great
documentary that's called the emperor of
all maladies
and that's what cancer is you know right
now we live in this
dominates
a disease that kills 600 000 plus
americans every year
and millions worldwide one out of
two men
so what does that mean you will be
affected by it somehow
even directly or indirectly
so what i want to show you all is just
kind of how it happens
and kind of give you hope because i tell
this uh
y'all will figure this out you will
my generation you're running out of time
y'all will figure it out
because we're getting closer so
first of all i don't want to get into
too much detail
but on its own cancer
itself is just unregulated cell growth
right
it's cell growth in cells that have
abnormally divide and divide
and divide that's it a normal cell
went broke it decided you know what
i'm gonna divide but i'm gonna divide
and i'm not gonna stop i'm just gonna
keep going
that's all it is that's that's what
cancer is
the issue is how do we get there
what's kind of what are the causes of it
this is a little complex but we have the
basic cell cycle
where going through the different phases
we have g1 s
g2 and
and m so these are the phases
in which the cell gets ready to divide
and of course divides
and mitosis or meiosis
there are genes that control the cell
[Music]
that's it so we have these things called
checkpoints
and these checkpoints aren't critical
every time you reach a certain
checkpoint the cell decides hey
everything looks good
divided everything's going properly we
can go to the next
what cancer does cancer interrupts
these checkpoints at different places
and that's how we can get a cell
cancers that's a lot of people okay
so what a cell can do to
offset it well a cell has a
built-in um program
a billion gene that um it's called
apoptosis
and basically the cell
figures out when the cell goes
something happened to my genetic
information
something occurred it's called program
cell that
the sailboat sounds like i'm not going
to divide
i will terminals well
the issue is sneaky sneaky
cancer cancer will
once the cell becomes cancerous it will
disrupt and
not disable the apoptotic genes
so it's almost as if the cancer cell or
cancer is thinking
it's like homo if there's a
gene that can destroy me let me go ahead
and disable it now so that when i'm
dividing dividing dividing
there's nothing that can stop so our
normal cells have apoptosis
cancer kind of disrupts that and gets
there
so when we're talking about
genes that can cause cancer they fall
into categories there are either what's
known as
alcohol genes or tumor suppressor genes
anybody see something called uncle genes
what you hear in that one
oncology so some of you may become
oncologists i don't know oncology is a
study
of cancer so there are genes
that are called uncle genes that
normal when they work they promote cell
division
they're they're they're good but when
they're mutated
they can cause some issues this is
obvious right sometimes science just
get the obvious tumor suppressor changes
but obviously um they're involved in
tumor suppressant but they're also
involved in other aspects of the cell
so these are the two kinds of genes that
we have to focus on
when you're trying to understand cancer
and we're going to make this relatively
painless
okay this gene right here
right raz is a
all this other substance a little
complex redness
is a gene it's an oncogene and its job
is to stimulate cell division
that's his job let me show you a pathway
so here we go this looks like
it's complex it's really not
here's our nucleus where our genetic
information is
here is outside of the cell
here's inside the cell of the cytoplasm
well there's going to be a signal from
the outside that's going to tell
the cell to the body it's time
for you to divide well
raz activates it
so that signal gets sent brad says okay
i become active now hey i'm ready to do
my job
it sends the signal inside the nucleus
divide
the nucleus will divide it signal is
going to come back
tell raz hey i'm done dividing and it's
going to go in reverse
gradually sell is good
cell is normal so wrath has an important
function
that's what normal rest does
what happens when ranges mutate
reds gets the signal rest
all right i'm active brass tells to sell
divide by the bottom the problem is rams
doesn't stop
[Music]
one gene can also
promote extracellular growth
which can then lead to
cancer one day
so when you start thinking about it it
seems
cut and dry oh yeah one gene can do this
now the issue with razz
is that brass is what's known as
a dominant activator what does that mean
you only need
one copy of rags
to potentially get cancer
so if you inherited a mutated last
of your mom or your dad that's all it
needs
for it to begin the process
of causing cancer so it's
um it's rare it doesn't happen a lot in
the general line
so it's it's not inherited all most of
the time
it can't happen but a lot of times these
mutations happen
sporadically like when
the brass is often mutated in um
melanomas it just it happens
over your lifetime you really don't pass
it off it can
but it's rarely that you can pass it on
so
this is an example of an alpha g that
can cause
cancer now
what about a tumor suppressor gene what
has to happen there
well with tumor suppressor genes you
have to get two mutations
to get this so you know these genes
don't just get past this to go to the
one that's
relevant you know the two genes as
proper one and broccoli that's some of
the most
popular tuna suppressive genes
so broccoli one stands for breast cancer
one
breast cancer two so these genes are two
suppressive genes
that are often inherited and
involved in breast and ovarian
cancer so generally what happens
you get one copy you usually inherit
one of them and then over time
you develop something happens where you
the other gene may
mutate on the other chromosome and you
get you have the two mutations
now this is important for you all to
know
um angelina jolie is a great example
angelina jolie tested
she had oh i want to say maybe
15 years ago she has a familiar
history of president obama cancer in her
family and it's
it's his intention
so she decided to get tested she was
she found out that she carried both
mutant continents
of joseph's pocket
did she have cancer no
so when you that's kind of the complex
thing about it when you find
out you have two mutant variants
of a tumor suppressor chain it doesn't
mean you have cancer
it just means you have the genes that
can promote cancer
now did she do like the young lady
who you saw in the earlier video she
decided i'm gonna live my life
oh i have kids i'm not going to stop
well what happened she developed cancer
a couple of years later
angelina jolie did something completely
not unheard of but at that time
she decided to have a double mastectomy
and then she decided to have a
hysterectomy
so she went ahead and said all right any
tissue
that's associated with this gene
that can become cancerous i'm gonna
remove it
you know she hadn't been she was
midnight at that time
that's why again when all this genetic
information is out there you have to be
wary of do you want to know
if you are so young what would you
do if you find out hey
if you do have familiar history of
breast cancer and ovarian cancer
you might want to know right that's
something that
you have to pay attention to but
once you find out what do you do
do i you know right now i'm telling you
about
preventative measures remove
the tissue in question but at 16 do you
i mean you don't think about a
hysterectomy like i don't
can you develop breast cancer at 18 or
yes i'm the second cousin that has stage
three presidents
survived but i died like 19 and 20.
so it doesn't have like an age limit so
these are things that you have to be
aware of especially if it's in your
family
so these tumor suppressor genius
and they're on the list
there are many many different types
of tumor suppressors so
we have these two suppressive genes that
can cause
cancer and we have these oncogenes that
cancer well why are there
a list of and you kind of see here
there's a list about
15 or so genes that are probably talked
about
because a lot of these genes these genes
here
and the donald trump talked about before
rats they're
commonly found in many different cancers
so it's not like
if i have a mutated white house nutella
is going to give
me x cancer
no no what generally happens
is you get a mutated allergy
and then when they start scanning they
start realizing oh no you haven't
mutated
p53 enemies in the problem
all of a sudden you start to realize you
have a cascading
effect you have multiple genes
and then that can lead to cancer
so when you put all of this
kind of in perspective and i kind of
want to skip to this because i want you
to really take this
in and there are multiple pathways so
here's colorectal cancer
here's prostate cancer so two different
cancers
and you see how it seems like linear
okay
well this linear path it looks linear
but it's and not see in this case you
see
multiple genes over time
that have been inactivated a mutate
a tuna suppressor gene here
a dominant gene here
noticing there's a present here another
one
so what happens when you have cancer
this long protein is pretty much
synonymous with a gas
[Music]
hit the gas pedal sound dividers
well y'all don't have to worry about
this in life
a long time ago doctor named for a
couple remembers this
um you the gas metals can get stuck in
cars
your gas meter could get stuck you could
be driving all of a sudden you're like
holding all the things on the floor and
also you're speeding them
well when this gene is mutated
it's like a stuck gasket you can't
stop you can't stop dividing
the tumor suppressor gene is the breaks
of the cell tumor suppressor so
when this one is okay you're dividing
you're dividing
this looks like stop dividing slowed up
but again you don't have to worry about
this
but what if someone cut the brake lines
up
they can't stop
[Music]
both of them will lead to unproliferated
cell
division so when you look at all of this
the stage from having a normal
you know normal tissue all the way to
one of the worst cancers
metastatic colorectal cancer you see
what has to happen along the way
it's not just one gene they're five
to ten to twenty and when you see
this prostate cancer which is the
deadliest cancer
wrong men you see it's
multiple genes multiple multiple
multiple genes that
are inactivated so
cancer and what's so bad about it every
cancer
is unique two people can have
metastatic breast cancer and compel
completely multiple sets of genes that
are mutated
that are not the same no one
cancer is the same
so when you start thinking about that
now you may start to think
why oh that's maybe why there's not a
general cure
for cancer because no one cancels the
same and
trying to put it into perspective i know
you can't see this
i just wanted to throw this there
for you all an engineer who loves
engineering what does this look like
a circuit this looks like a circuit
a very complex
circuit you know what this is
these are just pathways to cancer
this is just one these are multiple
pathways
with a couple you see those genes in the
center
they kind of branch off those are the
razors those are the broncos those are
the ones that control
other genes this is how we have to
attack cancer
there are multiple pathways there and
everyone
has their own unique pattern every
cancer
is unique to an individual so
how do we beat this
right now some of the biggest is biggest
therapies are the most important
theories
are targeted gene therapy and those gene
therapists are focusing on your
appearances
teaching your own immune system to
recognize
weight something the body's going wrong
and for it to attack it's called
immunotherapy
the future of cancer therapy is bright
the days of chemotherapy everyone get
the same chemotherapy
it's over because that doesn't work but
hey
if i can figure out if uh
dr lankford and myself we both go in
with
um early stage
uh pancreatic cancer
and they say well dr lankford we will
treat you with
this regular analog and we'll treat you
this way this way this is based upon
your cancer and dr j we'll treat you
this way and we're going to use your own
immune systems
to try to help recognize um
the cancer that you have so what studies
are showing us is that our own immune
system when cancer strikes
a lot of times our immune systems don't
recognize
it as being far so we can teach our
immune system
to recognize the cancerous cells without
harming the normal cells then we have a
better
outcome of things so kind of in in
summary
what i want you to take away from this
is
cancer is complex and it's simple
it's very simple in the way
it forms it's complex
and it's underlying tails as you kind of
peel back down and you start realizing
oh there's something else
you pick again and there's something
else but
detection will be the key
for you all who um
you know i talk about the burden of
knowing but if you understand if you
have a familiar history
of cancer in your family you might want
to start
early with detection because
even though it sounds more barrier we
can do something about
breast cancer right there are insurance
companies that there's a familiar
history of breast cancer in your family
they will pay for all the tests they
will pay for treatment
because they know if you take care of
this now and are not wait
10 15 20 years then it's going to be
more
costly so early protection is the key
and from there just pay attention i mean
cancer has
no age range it has no ethnicity
preference it doesn't care
it does not care it's it's the emperor
of all maladies
like foreign drawing about cancer
it's been here so we can do something
about it
your generation can do something but you
can't stop
you can't stop um
if you've been afflicted by it you know
what it can do
it's i mean it it ravages families
um they can tear families apart so
i i just encourage you all to again
stay um don't let it
you know dominate your life don't let it
act like you know there's nothing we can
do about it we
fight and if you notice any
you know you know we're coming up on you
know wearing breast cancer awareness
month
if you notice any
um support videos if you see any of them
they always fight
fight cancer when you're battling cancer
is a fight
and and it's it's ironic they gave my
grandfather 30 days
to live and he actually made
so hopefully you um
learn a little bit about this if you
have any questions i kind of finished it
folks
if you have any
[Music]
well i mean there are cancer calls in
ages right so we know
tobacco smoking and smoking cigarettes
cause cancer
we know uv exposure causes cancer
we know exposure to this poison and that
poison
but outside of this area it's like we
don't
i could go to i could go in and get
checked up
that's why they have screenings that's
why when you get a certain age
there are screenings for this you get a
certain change we
recommend you have a mastectomy
oh mammogram every year we suggest you
do this
you have a prostate um example psa exam
when you hit 40 when you hit 45 they're
just benchmarks we know their
cancers are more prevalent as you get
older
you start getting around 50 55 you start
to see
the prevalence of cancer grow up but we
don't know sir
it's sporadic random inherited
it it's strange you can inherit cancer
you can
it can because from uv to chemicals
we don't know we don't know there have
been identical twins
who have the same genetic information
one gets cancer
one doesn't
um do you know about like you probably
do but the paradise the nature
of larger organisms being less prone to
cancer than smaller organisms
yeah i just wanted to know if you knew
anything about it yeah i mean
but we've seen i mean they're plants
[Music]
but why do you think that larger
organisms are more
like us or so i mean you have more sales
the more sounds they are the more
problem you want to cancel
no they are less prone to care well you
know like well
it depends how much stupid lives so
i mean ourselves are typically actively
divided and the only cells that are not
divided
in their cells heart cells and
others everything else is they're
actively active now why
i mean there are cases of you know
feminine cancer there are cases
i don't hear too much about larger
larger mammals in the case i'm sure it
happens
it's just the fact i don't know how
widely studied it is
versus
[Music]
um the more you're prone to errors
that's
always the case mitosis things will go
wrong the longer you live
it's rare that you find someone 70 80 90
years old
with nothing you know so as the longer
you
live the longer you know your cells are
still dividing
they're going to make mistakes over time
and that's when you see
so you see more cancer so think about
you know outside of elephants and some
other mountains we
live a long time more of the cancers are
more prevalent
later in life so if you have something
that's maybe a large animal
they live for 20 30 years might not get
cancer
yeah like elephants and blue whales are
significantly less prone to cancer than
us it's called fetus
they don't they don't have a concrete
answer why you know they know that
i don't know
any other questions
longer but we have more
melodies out there so i'll give you an
example so my grandparents both
they lived in the mid-80s
in terms of dieting stuff we have many
more issues that are more prevalent now
than they were say you know two three
four generations ago
so i don't know yeah that's weird josh
because the fact we are living longer
we still have
medication for anything
so you gotta make it to bed
[Music]
that was a study done a long time ago
where they just saw
the president's epidemiologists
recognize the
whoa we know the people who smoke the
incidence of cancer today they kind of
tie
together it's just a chemical we just
know that there are certain
cancer-causing chemicals and rats and
different things that cause it so we
know it's prevalent with us
as well it doesn't mean you're going to
get it though that's the
name i have i have relatives that have
smoked
all their lives they're in their 70s
they're fine they have the smokers voice
cough
everything no cancer i know people have
died and
never smoked
[Music]
all right thank you for being my friends
thank you mr summer
for this y'all have a good one thank you